Hi guys! Welcome back to Golden Reviewer today. I'm going to show you how to disable game Optimization service on Samsung smartphone. First you search for this Netgrad app in play store and install it. Then you open the app, go to settings advanced options, and select manage system apps because the apps we are going to block are all system apps. Then we search for the keyword game. There are three apps we want to disable. One is game optimization service, another is game booster and game launcher as well. For game booster plus and game plugins, I think they they don't matter, but to be safe here, I uninstall them because they are not system apps so you can uninstall them. But for the three apps, we are going to block their system apps. So click these two buttons here to block them from accessing the internet. and then you press the button on the top left corner to make sure that Netgard is enabled. Then you accept all the promotes and until this key in your status bar, that means it's running. The next step we are going to do is we go to the settings of these apps. You can actually directly go there from within the Netguard, which is very convenient. Go to storage and clear data for all three apps. The rationale is that the game Optimization service actually download a full list of app signatures from Samsung server when it's running in the background and it will throttle according to this list of app names. So we block them from accessing the internet so they cannot download the app name list and then we clear the app data to remove any already downloaded app name list so that the Game Optimization service does not know which apps to throttle and finally turn off your Wi-fi or data and ending and restart your phone. This is because we want to make sure we run the Netgard app before the game optimization service can auto start from background when the device first boots up right. So turn off your Internet so even the game optimization service put up, it won't be able to download anything and the first thing we're going to do is to turn on the Netgraph to make sure that they are blocked and then we can turn on the Wi-fi Here you can see I switch on the toggle again to make sure and then you will be able to see this notification in your notification panel right? That means the Netguard is already working to block the internet access and now you can turn on your Wi-fi and you can continue to play your games without game Optimization service. And next I'll show you how much a difference it makes to actually turn on and off the game Optimization service. Okay, so here is my Galaxy S22 Ultra. It's the Snapdragon version. Of course I'll test the Exynos version later on in another video maybe, but here this is to show you how much a difference the game optimization service actually makes, right? So the one on the left is which game optimization service on and one on the right is which is off. Okay, so first thing you notice is how much smoother the one on the right is and this is confirmed by the Fps reading as well. we are seeing something around 50 now at the beginning we even have 60. On the other hand, on the left, we can see if we leave. game optimization series on the Fps is only around 30 to 40. Maybe at most it can reach 40 something, but most of the time is from 30 to 40 right? This also was confirmed by our previous test where if you play for 10 minutes, the average Fps is only around 32. So there's a clear difference in terms of frame rate. But we also see another difference in power consumption. If you look at the power consumption on the right, it's much higher than the one on the left. Okay, so higher performance requires higher power consumption and this will result in more heat as well. Okay, so turning off game optimization service does not magically make your device just better in every way, right? Yes, it can run the game smoother, but it will generate more heat and it will use more batching. And in the end, if your device becomes too hot, thermal throttling will still keep it and it will still restrict your performance and your Fps will become lower as well. Actually, we are seeing that chart here right? You will notice that the one on the right has started to heat up and the throttle the Fps starts to drop. It's still higher than the one on the left with Gos On, but that's physics. You cannot change it. Your device heats up, you have to throttle, otherwise it will eventually melt or explode, right? But then this gives us more possibility if you use a cooler or if you are staying at a cooler place and I think in that case your game will run much smoother and that was not possible with Gos on. And here we can use this Cpu float to understand this issue more clearly. If you look at the Cpu Gpu frequency, you can see that with Gos on, the Cpu is restricted to a very low frequency. No matter what you do, the frequency won't go up and it's the same story for Gpu. With Gos on, the Gpu frequency actually makes it out at around 300 megahertz, while with Gos off, it can actually reach around 500 megahertz right? And then the power consumption is very different as well. With Gos on it's own, only about 1200 ma, But with Gos off, we see that the current can go up to 2000 milliampere, right? So lastly, we can see the performance comparison the Fps record with Gos on and off we can see that's a very clear difference. With Gos Off, we get more than 10 Fps more and the game indeed run much smoother. And then for power, we see that the power consumption is also much higher, right? We see an overall more than 50 percent power consumption increase, and especially for the first two minutes when the device has not started to throttle. The average power may be even more than eight watts, which is pretty high, and we see this gradual throttling pattern as we see from other devices. So, but if we have Gos on, the power is restricted to a very low level, even from the beginning, so we don't see any change in power consumption. There is no throttling at all because it started with a low performance. Alright guys, so that's all for today's video and I have to say that I took the inspiration from a Korean channel and I'll leave the link down below. If you understand Korean, you can go check out. So I think he actually invented this blocking the internet access method so I uh, took it and I use maybe a better free software to do this. and to be honest, this method for now is still pretty tedious and it's not that practical. But of course I'll try to do more tests on this and we are all waiting for the system update from Samsung who actually promised to fix the issue. All right, So that's all for today. Thanks for watching and see you next time!