The Russia-ukraine war could be headed for a frozen conflict. The situation on ground is evolving in such a manner that a frozen conflict is more likely the way forward to end the war. Experts say that humanitarian sees fires hinting towards that possibility as well. But first, let's tell you what a frozen conflict is: A frozen conflict is a situation in which active armed conflict has ended, but without a formal peace agreement or other political framework in place. Frozen conflict occurs in regions of a country no longer controlled by its central authorities. These zones then remain under jurisdiction of the separators. As a result, states backing the separators run their puppet governments. Moreover, the lack of non-violent solutions failed to permanently end conflict. This form of conflict was unique to a few former Soviet republics, especially during the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991.. now, Russia is often accused of destabilizing its former Soviet neighbors to keep them in its sphere of influence and stop them from integrating with the Nato and Eu. That is why Russia annex Crimea, destabilized Eastern Ukraine in 2014, And days before Russia invaded Ukraine, it recognized the two separatist regions Donesk and Luhansk on the 21st of February. Moldova's breakaway territory and Georgia's rebel regions of South Ossetia and Abkhazia are also examples of this policy by Russia. More recent is the example of Nagorno-karabakh a disputed region between Armenians and the Azeri's In 2020, a ceasefire agreed that Azerbaijan would regain the territories it lost earlier and gained during its military maneuvers in 2020. But in Georgia, Moldova, Azerbaijan now Donbass in Ukraine, Moscow is known to have favored separatist sentiments in all of these regions. This is because the Kremlin aims to create a conflict without a solution, only so that it can step in to keep peace on its own terms. While many may believe that the war in Ukraine has begun and there is still some time for a frozen conflict, the recent humanitarian ceasefires in Ukraine indicate a strong possibility of it. Hello Beyond is now available in your country. Download the app now. get all the news on the move.