As we watch the spike that we've been seeing in commodity prices, we have heard a renewal of calls in the United States to drill more that the U.s should be energy independent. Our Rick Newman has been looking into that question and it's It's not as easy as that I think is the is the bottom line, right Rick? There's a lot of confusion about this, so I'm doing some reporting to try to bust some of these myths. So people think the United States used to be energy independent. So here's what that actually means when you combine all forms of energy that we produce in the United States, that's oil, but also natural gas. also coal. also renewables such as solar and wind. Yes, we do consume more than we produce, which you could say makes us independent. but we also participate in global markets, which means we export a lot of that. We still import energy, and in terms of oil, we are not oil independent. We have. We still consume considerably more oil than we produce, and we we have not been oil dependent since since the early days of the oil economy, which goes all the way back to the 1860s. So we have imported more oil than we have produced for something like the last 45 or 50 years, and that's probably going to continue. And even though we we do need oil here in the United States, a lot of U.s oil actually gets exported to other countries. This is a global market. There's no way that the U.s President can put up walls so that all all the oil that's produced in the United States stays in the United States. So that means we are susceptible to what happens in global oil markets. We cannot fence ourselves off from what's going on in the rest of the world when it comes to oil prices. Hey Rick, you are a very much a forward thinker here. Gas prices record high. I paid about over five dollars over the weekend for my premium unleaded. That's what my car takes. That's what it recommends. What do you think those will do? Or what do you think it means The midterm elections? It's a great question, and I'm not sure because ordinarily when gas prices go this high, if they stay that high for any period of time, it's doom for the party that's in control. But we saw some polls over the last few days with people Americans saying i think more than 60 percent in one poll said it's worth paying more for gas prices as a way of tolerating the sanctions that are on Russia and doing our part if you will to help out. So there is a portion of voters who actually seem to be okay with this for the time being. and we've also seen President Biden's approval rating which bottomed out around 41 percent has actually ticked up lately, so there does seem to be some support for, uh, rallying to the cause here. I think it's going to be a different story if if gas prices stay this higher, go higher for for the next eight months leading into the midterm elections because this is real pain for people you know who are dependent on cars and Sazi. I could have told you, man, get a car that doesn't require premium fuel. I, it's serious. How about one that requires less fuel Generally, Maybe get a hybrid or electric right? Coming around electric, I can't be ganged up here. It's Monday morning. it's going to be a long week. I think it. I think it's time to comment. I think it's no comment on Wednesday. Keep it moving, we're gonna. We're gonna drag you into the 21st century whether you like it or not. Arthric Newman thank you so much Appreciate it.